
Note that @code{strftime} is a standard C function and you should
consult its reference to be sure of the specifiers it allows.  The below
is from the documentation of the standard @code{strftime} implementation
in the glibc manual at
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Formatting-Calendar-Time.html#Formatting-Calendar-Time}.

This function takes a @var{mode}, a @var{template} and a @var{time}.

The @var{mode} is either @code{gmtime} (to get GMT times and dates) or
@code{localtime} (to get times and dates according to the local
timezone).

The conversion specifications that can appear in the format template
@var{template} are specialized for printing components of the date and
time according to the system locale.  The @var{time} is simply an
integer (Unix epoch time); you can get the current time with the
@code{now()} function.

Ordinary characters appearing in the @var{template} are copied to the
output.  Conversion specifiers are introduced by a @samp{%} character
and end with a format specifier taken from the following list.  The
whole @samp{%} sequence is replaced in the output string as follows:

@table @code
@item %a
The abbreviated weekday name according to the current locale.

@item %A
The full weekday name according to the current locale.

@item %b
The abbreviated month name according to the current locale.

@item %B
The full month name according to the current locale.

Using @code{%B} together with @code{%d} produces grammatically
incorrect results for some locales.

@item %c
The preferred calendar time representation for the current locale.

@item %C
The century of the year.  This is equivalent to the greatest integer not
greater than the year divided by 100.

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.

@item %d
The day of the month as a decimal number (range @code{01} through @code{31}).

@item %D
The date using the format @code{%m/%d/%y}.

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.

@item %e
The day of the month like with @code{%d}, but padded with blank (range
@code{ 1} through @code{31}).

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.

@item %F
The date using the format @code{%Y-%m-%d}.  This is the form specified
in the @w{ISO 8601} standard and is the preferred form for all uses.

This format was first standardized by @w{ISO C99} and by POSIX.1-2001.

@item %g
The year corresponding to the ISO week number, but without the century
(range @code{00} through @code{99}).  This has the same format and value
as @code{%y}, except that if the ISO week number (see @code{%V}) belongs
to the previous or next year, that year is used instead.

This format was first standardized by @w{ISO C99} and by POSIX.1-2001.

@item %G
The year corresponding to the ISO week number.  This has the same format
and value as @code{%Y}, except that if the ISO week number (see
@code{%V}) belongs to the previous or next year, that year is used
instead.

This format was first standardized by @w{ISO C99} and by POSIX.1-2001
but was previously available as a GNU extension.

@item %h
The abbreviated month name according to the current locale.  The action
is the same as for @code{%b}.

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.

@item %H
The hour as a decimal number, using a 24-hour clock (range @code{00} through
@code{23}).

@item %I
The hour as a decimal number, using a 12-hour clock (range @code{01} through
@code{12}).

@item %j
The day of the year as a decimal number (range @code{001} through @code{366}).

@item %k
The hour as a decimal number, using a 24-hour clock like @code{%H}, but
padded with blank (range @code{ 0} through @code{23}).

This format is a GNU extension.

@item %l
The hour as a decimal number, using a 12-hour clock like @code{%I}, but
padded with blank (range @code{ 1} through @code{12}).

This format is a GNU extension.

@item %m
The month as a decimal number (range @code{01} through @code{12}).

@item %M
The minute as a decimal number (range @code{00} through @code{59}).

@item %n
A single @samp{\n} (newline) character.

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.

@item %p
Either @samp{AM} or @samp{PM}, according to the given time value; or the
corresponding strings for the current locale.  Noon is treated as
@samp{PM} and midnight as @samp{AM}.  In most locales
@samp{AM}/@samp{PM} format is not supported, in such cases @code{"%p"}
yields an empty string.

@ignore
We currently have a problem with makeinfo.  Write @samp{AM} and @samp{am}
both results in `am'.  I.e., the difference in case is not visible anymore.
@end ignore
@item %P
Either @samp{am} or @samp{pm}, according to the given time value; or the
corresponding strings for the current locale, printed in lowercase
characters.  Noon is treated as @samp{pm} and midnight as @samp{am}.  In
most locales @samp{AM}/@samp{PM} format is not supported, in such cases
@code{"%P"} yields an empty string.

This format is a GNU extension.

@item %r
The complete calendar time using the AM/PM format of the current locale.

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.
In the POSIX locale, this format is equivalent to @code{%I:%M:%S %p}.

@item %R
The hour and minute in decimal numbers using the format @code{%H:%M}.

This format was first standardized by @w{ISO C99} and by POSIX.1-2001
but was previously available as a GNU extension.

@item %s
The number of seconds since the epoch, i.e., since 1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC.
Leap seconds are not counted unless leap second support is available.

This format is a GNU extension.

@item %S
The seconds as a decimal number (range @code{00} through @code{60}).

@item %t
A single @samp{\t} (tabulator) character.

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.

@item %T
The time of day using decimal numbers using the format @code{%H:%M:%S}.

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.

@item %u
The day of the week as a decimal number (range @code{1} through
@code{7}), Monday being @code{1}.

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.

@item %U
The week number of the current year as a decimal number (range @code{00}
through @code{53}), starting with the first Sunday as the first day of
the first week.  Days preceding the first Sunday in the year are
considered to be in week @code{00}.

@item %V
The @w{ISO 8601:1988} week number as a decimal number (range @code{01}
through @code{53}).  ISO weeks start with Monday and end with Sunday.
Week @code{01} of a year is the first week which has the majority of its
days in that year; this is equivalent to the week containing the year's
first Thursday, and it is also equivalent to the week containing January
4.  Week @code{01} of a year can contain days from the previous year.
The week before week @code{01} of a year is the last week (@code{52} or
@code{53}) of the previous year even if it contains days from the new
year.

This format was first standardized by POSIX.2-1992 and by @w{ISO C99}.

@item %w
The day of the week as a decimal number (range @code{0} through
@code{6}), Sunday being @code{0}.

@item %W
The week number of the current year as a decimal number (range @code{00}
through @code{53}), starting with the first Monday as the first day of
the first week.  All days preceding the first Monday in the year are
considered to be in week @code{00}.

@item %x
The preferred date representation for the current locale.

@item %X
The preferred time of day representation for the current locale.

@item %y
The year without a century as a decimal number (range @code{00} through
@code{99}).  This is equivalent to the year modulo 100.

@item %Y
The year as a decimal number, using the Gregorian calendar.  Years
before the year @code{1} are numbered @code{0}, @code{-1}, and so on.

@item %z
@w{RFC 822}/@w{ISO 8601:1988} style numeric time zone (e.g.,
@code{-0600} or @code{+0100}), or nothing if no time zone is
determinable.

This format was first standardized by @w{ISO C99} and by POSIX.1-2001
but was previously available as a GNU extension.

In the POSIX locale, a full @w{RFC 822} timestamp is generated by the format
@w{@samp{"%a, %d %b %Y %H:%M:%S %z"}} (or the equivalent
@w{@samp{"%a, %d %b %Y %T %z"}}).

@item %Z
The time zone abbreviation (empty if the time zone can't be determined).

@item %%
A literal @samp{%} character.
@end table

According to POSIX.1 every call to @code{strftime} checks the contents
of the environment variable @code{TZ} before any output is produced.
