\input texinfo-altfont
\input texinfo-logo
\input texinfo
@selectaltfont{cmbright}
@setlogo{CFEngineFrontPage}

@c *********************************************************************
@c
@c  This is a TEXINFO file. It generates both TEX documentation and
@c  the "on line" documentation "info" files.
@c
@c  The file is structured like a programming language. Each chapter
@c  starts with a chapter comment.
@c
@c  Menus list the subsections so that an online info-reader can parse
@c  the file hierarchically.
@c
@c ***********************************************************************
@c %** start of header
@setfilename st-fips.info
@settitle FIPS certification
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %** end of header

@titlepage
@title FIPS validated cryptography in CFEngine
@subtitle A CFEngine Special Topics Handbook
@author CFEngine AS


@page

@cartouche
@quotation
The FIPS 140-2 validation for approved cryptographic modules is a current
government requirement in the USA. This document explains the use of
FIPS 140-2 validated modules in commercial CFEngine versions.

FIPS 140-3 is underway and will supercede FIPS 140-2 at some unknown time in the future.

QA: MB,NP,CR
@end quotation
@end cartouche

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} July 2010 CFEngine AS

@end titlepage


@c *************************** File begins here ************************



@iftex
@contents
@end iftex


@unnumberedsec What is FIPS 140-2?
@sp 1

FIPS 140-2 is a standard published by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST)[1].  NIST also established the
Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP)[2] that validates
cryptographic modules to the FIPS 140-2 standard.  Vendors seek
validation for their cryptographic modules in order to provide
assurance that their encryption solutions are properly implemented
to an accepted standard.

A cryptographic module that has already been issued a FIPS 140-2
validation certificate may be incorporated or embedded into
another product. [3]

In order to use a validated cryptographic module and attest FIPS 140-2
validation, the new product must:
@itemize
@item Reference the certificate number of the validated module,
@item Must not alter the original validated module.
@item Must adhere to the documented security policy for the validated module.
@end itemize


@unnumberedsec What is the certificate number?
@sp 1

CFEngine attests to NIST certificate number 1111.

These validations were not initiated by CFEngine, but any user of
this Open Source software module can use them provided we follow the
instructions in the security policy.

@unnumberedsec Declaration from CFEngine
@sp 1

The current FIPS 140-2 Crypto Policy Officer for CFEngine resides 
at CFEngine AS/Inc headquarters.  The security officer attests that
packages provided by CFEngine, on the customer download site
software.CFEngine.com, whose names contain the term FIPS in upper or
lower case have been compiled according to the security policy for
certificate 1111 [5].  CFEngine packages, marked FIPS, have been built
from source code located at:

@url{http://www.openssl.org/source/openssl-fips-1.2.tar.gz}

@noindent according to the security policy documented in [6].
CFEngine can provide compliant software on all Unix-like platforms,
but not currently on Windows.


@unnumberedsec Algorithms
@sp 1

CFEngine uses OpenSSL encryption code from the libcrypto library. It
does not use any SSL or TLS specific modules.  CFEngine uses RSA
encryption for authentication. Commercial versions of CFEngine use
AES-256 symmetric encryption with a random session key for transport.

@unnumberedsec Future policy
@sp 1

It is CFEngine's policy to obtain a private validation of the
OpenSSL crypto module at some time in the next two years for the principal
purpose of branding. This is a long process and does not alter the
specification of the software in any way.

@page
@unnumberedsec References
@sp 1

@enumerate
@item Security policy 1111:

@item @url{http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/STM/cmvp/standards.html}

@item @url{http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/STM/cmvp/index.html}

@item @url{http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/STM/cmvp/documents/CMVPFAQ.pdf}

@item @url{http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/STM/cmvp/documents/140-1/140val-all.htm#1111}

@item @url{http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/STM/cmvp/documents/140-1/140crt/140crt1111.pdf}
@item @url{http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/STM/cmvp/documents/140-1/140sp/140sp1111.pdf}


@end enumerate

@bye

 
