\input texinfo-altfont
\input texinfo-logo
\input texinfo
@selectaltfont{cmbright}
@setlogo{CFEngineFrontPage}

@c *********************************************************************
@c
@c  This is a TEXINFO file. It generates both TEX documentation and
@c  the "on line" documentation "info" files.
@c
@c  The file is structured like a programming language. Each chapter
@c  starts with a chapter comment.
@c
@c  Menus list the subsections so that an online info-reader can parse
@c  the file hierarchically.
@c
@c ***********************************************************************
@c %** start of header
@setfilename st-missioncritical.info
@settitle CFEngine for Mission Critical Operations
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %** end of header

@titlepage
@title CFEngine for Mission Critical Operations
@subtitle A CFEngine Special Topics Handbook
@author CFEngine AS


@page

@cartouche
@quotation

@end quotation
@end cartouche

@vskip 2cm

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2010 CFEngine AS

@end titlepage


@c *************************** File begins here ************************


@ifinfo
@dircategory CFEngine Training
@direntry
* CFEngine Modularization:
                      CFEngine is a language based tool specifically
                      designed for configuring and maintaining
                      Unix-like operating systems attached
                      to a TCP/IP network.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@ifnottex


@node Top, What is convergent file editing?, (dir), (dir)
@top CFEngine for Mission Critical Operations


@end ifnottex
@iftex
@contents
@end iftex

@ifhtml
@html
<a href="#Contents"><h1>COMPLETE TABLE OF CONTENTS</h1></a>
<h2>Summary of contents</h2>
@end html
@end ifhtml

@node 
@unnumberedsec What are Mission Critical Operations?
@sp 1


@node 
@unnumberedsec How do I make a change in infrastructure?
@sp 1


@node 
@unnumberedsec Using CFEngine for Change Management
@sp 1


@node 
@unnumberedsubsec ITIL Change Management
@sp 1


@node Separating Policy Changes from ad-hoc Changes
@unnumberedsec Separating Policy Changes from @i{ad-hoc} Changes
@sp 1












@ifhtml
@html
<a name="Contents">
@contents
@end html
@end ifhtml

@ifhtml
@html
<script type="text/javascript">
var gaJsHost = (("https:" == document.location.protocol) ? "https:// 
ssl." : "http://www.");
document.write(unescape("%3Cscript src='" + gaJsHost + "google- 
analytics.com/ga.js' type='text/javascript'%3E%3C/script%3E"));
</script>
<script type="text/javascript">
var pageTracker = _gat._getTracker("UA-2576171-2");
pageTracker._initData();
pageTracker._trackPageview();
</script>
@end html
@end ifhtml

@bye

