\input texinfo-altfont
\input texinfo-logo
\input texinfo
@selectaltfont{cmbright}
@setlogo{CFEngineFrontPage}

@c *********************************************************************
@c
@c  This is a TEXINFO file. It generates both TEX documentation and
@c  the "on line" documentation "info" files.
@c
@c  The file is structured like a programming language. Each chapter
@c  starts with a chapter comment.
@c
@c  Menus list the subsections so that an online info-reader can parse
@c  the file hierarchically.
@c
@c ***********************************************************************
@c %** start of header
@setfilename st-cloud.info
@settitle Cloud
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %** end of header

@titlepage
@title Cloud Computing and Managed Services
@subtitle A CFEngine Special Topics Handbook
@author CFEngine AS


@page

@cartouche
@quotation
Cloud Computing is a new economic approach to computer resource management
 in which computers can be created and retired on demand. The challenges
of managing this increasingly dynamic environment are considerable. CFEngine
Nova brings scalable assurances about compliance and performance.
@end quotation
@end cartouche

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2010 CFEngine AS

@end titlepage


@c *************************** File begins here ************************


@ifinfo
@dircategory CFEngine Training
@direntry
* CFEngine Iteration:
                      CFEngine is a language based tool specifically
                      designed for configuring and maintaining
                      Unix-like operating systems attached
                      to a TCP/IP network.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@ifnottex


@node Top, What is Cloud Computing?, (dir), (dir)
@top Federation
@menu
* What is Cloud Computing?::    
* Is Cloud Computing for everything and everyone?::  
* How does CFEngine enable Cloud Computing?::  
* Permanent infra-structure with vibrant change::  
* How does Cloud relate to virtualization?::  
* Isn't virtualization inefficient?::  
* Challenges for Cloud Computing::  
* What if I change my mind about Cloud Computing?::  
* The future - molecular computing::  
@end menu


@end ifnottex

@ifhtml
@html
<a href="#Contents"><h1>COMPLETE TABLE OF CONTENTS</h1></a>
<h2>Summary of contents</h2>
@end html
@end ifhtml

@node What is Cloud Computing?, Is Cloud Computing for everything and everyone?, Top, Top
@unnumberedsec What is Cloud Computing?


Cloud Computing refers to the commoditization of
computing, i.e. a world in which computers may be borrowed on demand
from a resource pool, like renting a car or loaning a book from the
library. The term `Cloud' comes from a model of the Internet, where
the precise details of how everything fits together are fuzzy. In a
strongly networked environment, it might matter less where objects are
physically located.

Commoditization of computers is an important strategy for business
because it has the potential to eliminate a lot of the investment
overhead for equipment during times of rapid change, as well as to
recycle no-longer needed resources and save on redundant investment. You may think of
Cloud Computing as `Recycle-able Computing' -- a world in which you can
use something for a short time and then discard it, without fear of waste.

@node Is Cloud Computing for everything and everyone?, How does CFEngine enable Cloud Computing?, What is Cloud Computing?, Top
@unnumberedsec Is Cloud Computing for everything and everyone?

Cloud Computing does for computers what the database did for
information.  Instead of having to keep reams of paper physically on
site, databases allowed us to virtualize the information and care less
about where the data were stored. Today we can call up a resource
easily and cheaply from a database, and have someone else manage the
service for us. Cloud computing allows us to dial up a new
computer, like a book from the library, and then return it to the pool
for others to use when we are done.  It frees us from thinking about
the specific location of the host, and we can appoint someone to
manage this abstraction for us.

Of course, this has negative aspects too. In a security environment,
you do indeed want to know exactly where your resources are.  If you
are storing diamonds, you want a bank not a library, and you want to
know exactly where the physical objects are.  The same is true for
valuable data and computers. 

Cloud Computing might be popular in the contemporary press, but it should be seen
in clear terms as one strategy of several for managing resources efficiently.
Some people still buy books, cars and dig wells, while others loan books, rent
cars and get water from the water authority. Different economic models
have different applications.

@node How does CFEngine enable Cloud Computing?, Permanent infra-structure with vibrant change, Is Cloud Computing for everything and everyone?, Top
@unnumberedsec How does CFEngine enable Cloud Computing?

CFEngine has technology that can quickly bring machines, either real
or virtual, from an uninitiated state to a fully working and customized
state in seconds or minutes, without any human intervention.
It can thus turn a generic resource into a specialized managed
service on demand. CFEngine makes it extremely cheap to rebuild
systems from scratch. This is exactly what a vibrant recycling
regime needs to work efficiently.

@node Permanent infra-structure with vibrant change, How does Cloud relate to virtualization?, How does CFEngine enable Cloud Computing?, Top
@unnumberedsec Permanent infra-structure with vibrant change

Not all your computers should be disposable. Certain key
infrastructure items like DNS servers, directory servers, databases,
etc are part of a permanent infrastructure. What you need there is
unwavering stability, not agility and impermanence.

CFEngine's lightweight repair capabilities are not only suitable for
building machines quickly, but also for maintaining their state over
time. It only pays to `rent services' (either from yourself or from a third
party cloud provider) if you use the service infrequently, or your needs
are constantly changing. The lack of permanence of cloud services can
itself become an overhead if what you really need is constancy and security.

The overhead of investment in physical infrastructure is cheap if that
one term investment will last you for a long time, unchanged.
For that reason, cloud services will never solve everyone's needs
all the time. It is merely one product of choice.


@node How does Cloud relate to virtualization?, Isn't virtualization inefficient?, Permanent infra-structure with vibrant change, Top
@unnumberedsec How does Cloud relate to virtualization?

Virtualization is the tool that makes Cloud Computing practical.
Every time a physical machine needs to be deployed or retired, it
requires the physical presence of a human. To deploy or recycle a
physical machine, somehow usually has to touch the box.

To deploy and tear down a virtual machine, however, no one needs to
touch anything literally. Machines can be installed, moved and
retired on command, using the physical computers as the host
for a purely software process. Virtualization turns computer deployment
into a software application.

CFEngine can help to manage the deployment of virtual machines, by
working on the physical host directly. It can also run on every
virtual machine to manage them in a seamless process in which no one
needs to think about what kind of machine software is running on.
CFEngine can bring stability to the hosts or the virtual guests, or it
can keep virtual machines running without the need to
reboot@footnote{Rebooting a virtual machine in the cloud often means
losing all of its special properties, so one needs to be ready
to rebuild in case of catastrophe.}.


@node Isn't virtualization inefficient?, Challenges for Cloud Computing, How does Cloud relate to virtualization?, Top
@unnumberedsec Isn't virtualization inefficient?

Virtualized computers run as software simulations, adding an extra
layer of overhead.  Using virtual machines is thus not as fast or
processor-efficient as using real machines, however the processing
overhead is written off in different ways.

About 70-80% of the electrical power used by a computer is wasted just
by turning it on. Only the remaining 20% go to solving real
problems. However, most computers are very under-utilized (2-5%), so
that many more machines than necessary are switched on at any one
moment, compounding the cost of merely being switched on with an
additional cost of cooling.  This expense costs datacentres money
every day. By squeezing 5-10 virtual machines into a single physical
host container, one has a net saving of electrical power and man-power and
often indistinguishable performance.

Virtualization is a form of packaging, which enables service providers
to separate services more easily with a `Chinese Wall' barrier.
This is useful when dealing with services belonging to different companies
or different users on the same physical host. The packaging aspect
of virtual machines is therefore a form of `information management'.


@node Challenges for Cloud Computing, What if I change my mind about Cloud Computing?, Isn't virtualization inefficient?, Top
@unnumberedsec Challenges for Cloud Computing

Dealing with scale, rapid change and impermanence could quickly lead
to a processing overhead for humans, i.e. in the management of the
cloud computers. In order to cope, some models force an
oversimplification onto the user, forcing them to make do with second
best (a `cheap rental').

However, the requirements of computing are getting more complicated,
not less.  Even as this new economic management of resources comes
into focus, companies are having to deal with increasing legislation
about privacy, security, compliance with audits, and more. CFEngine
addresses this challenge by integrating transparency of process
and business goals into its scalable approach to continuous maintenance.

The approach used by CFEngine is to:
@sp 1
@itemize
@item Help to bring comprehension to the scope of the problem (Knowledge Management and Model-based Desired State Computing).
@item Help to implement change quickly and cheaply (through Lightweight Automation).
@item Help to bring measurable assurance about the state of compliance with policy (continuous maintenance).
@end itemize
@sp 1
CFEngine's model promise-based computing provides both a language of
assurance for keeping promises, and a measuring stick against which
compliance can be measured. It is not necessary to make ad hoc
judgements; every statement about the system can be documented and
woven into a narrative about the system that can be understood
both by technicians and management stakeholders.


@itemize
Deployment and maintaining real or virtual machines

Instant Managed services from `stem cell' hosts

Modelling the required properties of all machines and
allowing non-experts insight into that model to see how
their business goals are being handled.

Focus on outcomes rather than implementation.

Bring systems from any state into compliance.

@end itemize

@node What if I change my mind about Cloud Computing?, The future - molecular computing, Challenges for Cloud Computing, Top
@unnumberedsec What if I change my mind about Cloud Computing?

CFEngine can be used in a public or in a private cloud, and it can be
used on local servers, desktops and even mobile devices. CFEngine is
designed to be simple and lightweight, but powerful in its concepts
and capabilities. It out-performs most other management software and
imposes fewer limitations.  If you want to move a service or a
server-role, it is a simple matter to do so. CFEngine will continue
to manage the service no matter what the underlying resource model.


@node The future - molecular computing,  , What if I change my mind about Cloud Computing?, Top
@unnumberedsec The future - molecular computing

At CFEngine, we believe that Cloud Computing is just a rehearsal for a
real change in the way computing services are managed. In the future,
the capabilities that assured management of recycle-able parts bring
to services will allow atomic services to be combined into new and
complex fabrics of functionality. The chemistry of these services will
enable businesses and other organizations to express unique functions
by combining a standard set of elementary parts.  CFEngine's role in
such a fabric would be the same as today: bringing self-maintaining,
knowledge-based management to an infrastructure where users are free
to make the most of shared pools.


@ifhtml
@html
<a name="Contents">
@contents
@end html
@end ifhtml

@ifhtml
@html
<script type="text/javascript">
var gaJsHost = (("https:" == document.location.protocol) ? "https:// 
ssl." : "http://www.");
document.write(unescape("%3Cscript src='" + gaJsHost + "google- 
analytics.com/ga.js' type='text/javascript'%3E%3C/script%3E"));
</script>
<script type="text/javascript">
var pageTracker = _gat._getTracker("UA-2576171-2");
pageTracker._initData();
pageTracker._trackPageview();
</script>
@end html
@end ifhtml

@bye

