.TH cf-execd 8 "Maintenance Commands"
.SH NAME
cf-execd - cfengine's execution agent

.SH SYNOPSIS:

 cf-execd [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION:

The executor daemon is a scheduler and wrapper for
execution of cf-agent. It collects the output of the
agent and can email it to a specified address. It can
splay the start time of executions across the network
and work as a class-based clock for scheduling.
.B cfengine
is a self-healing configuration and change management based system. You can think of.B cfengine
as a very high level language, much higher level than Perl or shell. Asingle statement is called a promise, and compliance can result in many hundreds of filesbeing created, or the permissions of many hundreds offiles being set. The idea of .B cfengine
is to create a one or more sets of configuration files which willclassify and describe the setup of every host in a network.
.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS:
.IP "--help, -h"
Print the help message
.IP "--debug, -d" value
Set debugging level 0,1,2,3
.IP "--verbose, -v"
Output verbose information about the behaviour of the agent
.IP "--dry-run, -n"
All talk and no action mode - make no changes, only inform of promises not kept
.IP "--version, -V"
Output the version of the software
.IP "--file, -f" value
Specify an alternative input file than the default
.IP "--define, -D" value
Define a list of comma separated classes to be defined at the start of execution
.IP "--negate, -N" value
Define a list of comma separated classes to be undefined at the start of execution
.IP "--no-lock, -K"
Ignore locking constraints during execution (ifelapsed/expireafter) if "too soon" to run
.IP "--inform, -I"
Print basic information about changes made to the system, i.e. promises repaired
.IP "--diagnostic, -x"
Activate internal diagnostics (developers only)
.IP "--no-fork, -F"
Run as a foreground processes (do not fork)
.IP "--ld-library-path, -L" value
Set the internal value of LD_LIBRARY_PATH for child processes
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Burgess and Cfengine AS
.SH INFORMATION

Bug reports: bug-cfengine@cfengine.org
.pp
Community help: help-cfengine@cfengine.org
.pp
Community info: http://www.cfengine.org
.pp
Support services: http://www.cfengine.com
.pp
This software is (C) 2008 Cfengine AS.
