.TH cf-know 8 "Maintenance Commands"
.SH NAME
cf-know - cfengine's knowledge agent

.SH SYNOPSIS:

 cf-know [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION:

The knowledge management agent is capable of building
and analysing a semantic knowledge network. It can
configure a relational database to contain an ISO
standard topic map and permit regular-expression based
searching of the map. Analysis of the semantic network
can be performed providing graphical output of the data,
and cf-know can assemble and converge the reference manual
for the current version of the Cfengine software.
.B cfengine
is a self-healing configuration and change management based system. You can think of.B cfengine
as a very high level language, much higher level than Perl or shell. Asingle statement is called a promise, and compliance can result in many hundreds of filesbeing created, or the permissions of many hundreds offiles being set. The idea of .B cfengine
is to create a one or more sets of configuration files which willclassify and describe the setup of every host in a network.
.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS:
.IP "--help, -h"
Print the help message
.IP "--debug, -d" value
Set debugging level 0,1,2,3
.IP "--verbose, -v"
Output verbose information about the behaviour of the agent
.IP "--version, -V"
Output the version of the software
.IP "--file, -f" value
Specify an alternative input file than the default
.IP "--graphs, -g"
Generate graphs from topic map data
.IP "--html, -H"
Output queries in HTML
.IP "--manual, -m"
Generate reference manual from internal data
.IP "--manpage, -M"
Generate reference manpage from internal data
.IP "--map-full, -K" value
Show full image map for argument
.IP "--map-impact, -k" value
Show impact map for argument
.IP "--query_cfdb, -Q" value
Query the CFDB for testing, etc
.IP "--quote, -q" value
Quote encapsulated HTML output through the query engine
.IP "--regex, -r" value
Specify a regular expression for searching the topic map
.IP "--sql, -s"
Store topic map in defined SQL database
.IP "--syntax, -S" value
Print a syntax summary of the optional keyword or this cfengine version
.IP "--topic, -t" value
Specify a literal string topic to look up in the topic map
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Burgess and Cfengine AS
.SH INFORMATION

Bug reports: http://bug.cfengine.com, .pp
Community help: http://forum.cfengine.com
.pp
Community info: http://www.cfengine.org
.pp
Support services: http://www.cfengine.com
.pp
This software is Copyright (C) 2008- Cfengine AS.
