.TH cf-runagent 8 "Maintenance Commands"
.SH NAME
cf-runagent - Run agent

.SH SYNOPSIS:

 cf-runagent [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION:

The run agent connects to a list of running instances of
the cf-serverd service. The agent allows a user to
forego the usual scheduling interval for the agent and
activate cf-agent on a remote host. Additionally, a user
can send additional classes to be defined on the remote
host. Two kinds of classes may be sent: classes to decide
on which hosts the agent will be started, and classes that
the user requests the agent should define on execution.
The latter type is regulated by cf-serverd's role based
access control.
.B cfengine
is a self-healing configuration and change management based system. You can think of.B cfengine
as a very high level language, much higher level than Perl or shell. Asingle statement is called a promise, and compliance can result in many hundreds of filesbeing created, or the permissions of many hundreds offiles being set. The idea of .B cfengine
is to create a one or more sets of configuration files which willclassify and describe the setup of every host in a network.
.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS:
.IP "--help, -h"
Print the help message
.IP "--debug, -d" value
Set debugging level 0,1,2,3
.IP "--verbose, -v"
Output verbose information about the behaviour of the agent
.IP "--dry-run, -n"
All talk and no action mode - make no changes, only inform of promises not kept
.IP "--version, -V"
Output the version of the software
.IP "--file, -f" value
Specify an alternative input file than the default
.IP "--define-class, -D" value
Define a list of comma separated classes to be sent to a remote agent
.IP "--select-class, -s" value
Define a list of comma separated classes to be used to select remote agents by constraint
.IP "--inform, -I"
Print basic information about changes made to the system, i.e. promises repaired
.IP "--remote-options, -o" value
Pass options to a remote server process
.IP "--diagnostic, -x"
Activate internal diagnostics (developers only)
.IP "--hail, -H" value
Hail the following comma-separated lists of hosts, overriding default list
.IP "--interactive, -i"
Enable interactive mode for key trust
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Burgess and Cfengine AS
.SH INFORMATION

Bug reports: bug-cfengine@cfengine.org
.pp
Community help: help-cfengine@cfengine.org
.pp
Community info: http://www.cfengine.org
.pp
Support services: http://www.cfengine.com
.pp
This software is Copyright (C) 2008- Cfengine AS.
