
The default copy method is @samp{mtime} (modification time), meaning that
the source file is copied to the destination (promiser) file, if the
source file has been modified more recently than the destination.

The different options are:
@itemize
@item
@code{mtime} Cfengine copies the file if the modification time of the source
file is more recent than that of the promised file

@item
@code{ctime} Cfengine copies the file if the creation time of the source file
is more recent than that of the promised file

@item
@code{atime} Cfengine copies the file if the modification time or creation
time of the source file is more recent than that of the promised file.  If the
times are equal, a byte-for-bye comparison is done on the files to determine
if it needs to be copied.

@item
@code{exists} Cfengine copies the file if the promised file does not already
exist.

@item
@code{binary} Cfengine copies the file if they are both plain files and a
byte-for-byte comparison determines that they are different.  If both are not
plain files, Cfengine reverts to comparing the @code{mtime} and @code{ctime}
of the files.  If the source file is on a different machine (i.e., network
copy), then @code{hash} is used instead to reduce network bandwidth.

@item
@code{hash} Cfengine copies the file if they are both plain files and a
message digest comparison indicates that the files are different.  In
Enterprise versions of Cfengine version 3.1.0 and later, SHA256 is used as a
message digest hash to conform with FIPS; in older Enterprise versions of
Cfengine and all Community versions, MD5 is used.

@item
@code{digest} a synonym for @code{hash}

@end itemize
